Template literal types.
Not deserving enough of its own section I
don't think, but a kind of a cool thing.
It's a recent addition to TypeScript.
So as of the time of filming this course
4.3 is the most recent TypeScript release.
So template literal types have not
been around for all that long.
But I would like to show them
to you because especially around
data layer stuff they are really,
really promising.
They look like a great way to
make highly reusable things.
So we're going to
experiment with them here.
I have first,
a type that I'm calling ArtFeatures,
things that could appear in a painting,
and then I have colors.
So using the same syntax that
you're used to using for
ES template literals, by that I
mean the backtick strings where you
can interpolate non-string
values into a template string.
We can create what's called
a template literal type.
And what we're seeing here, so
first, let's look at the syntax.
We've got the backticks here.
We have the dollar sign single brace,
we're used to seeing that, right?
And what we get,
it's sort of every combination
of color and paintable art feature.
So we've got a darkSienna_cabin,
darkSienna_tree, darkSienna_sunset, and
now we're going to sapGreen_cabin.
And it keeps going and going and going.
When I showed this to my wife,
she said that looks like a factorial.
That will tell you how many of
these you're going to get, right?
It's every possible combination,
how many unique combinations you'll get.
But these are not good,
in terms of, sorry,
these are not idiomatic
JavaScript method names, right?
I'm calling this art method names and
look at those types,
we don't use snake case, right?
Not in JavaScript,
I mean you totally could.
The language supports it, but it's much
more conventional to use camelCase.
So how would we accomplish this?
Well, you have a couple
little special things,
special transformers of these
elements within your template
literal type that would let
you do something like this.
Capitalize colors and
we've removed the underscore but
look at the d in darkSienna.
Despite up here it being lowercase, right,
the first letter's been capitalized and so
we can get some nice method names here.
Not a coincidence by the way,
the feature set was built such that you
could have lowercased property names and
then maybe have getters and setters.
And you want when people are using
your code to be able to use these
as things that feel like they
were painstakingly implemented
one at a time when really,
it's just sort of an a times b.
And here is the format of
the string that I want.
So why am I talking about
this in a chapter of this
course called mapped types?
Well, let's bring it back to mapped types.
So what we can do here,
some people call this key mapping.
And effectively if we go back
to our analogy of array.map,
when you use array,map, you are converting
the values of array A to array B, right?
You're just converting the values.
This lets us manipulate the keys as
we're making that transformation.
Let's see what happens, right?
So here's the mapped type, right?
I'm saying I'm iterating over each key and
by the way,
let me introduce this before
[LAUGH] we go too deep in here.
Let's say that this is
just some piece of data,
a record that I persist
to an API somewhere.
I've got an array of numbers,
I've got an array of strings,
and then this flags thing
is a record of Booleans.
So I'm gonna pop out into the TypeScript
playground, we can play with this.
Data state.so we've got digits,
which is a number array, here's flags.
So I've got dark mode and mobile,
those are each a Boolean,
maybe little user preferences that someone
could turn those on and off, right?
Here I'm just being yelled at because I'm
using this before it's been assigned.
But it's equivalent to,
Equivalent to something like that.
We already talked about record but
just bringing us home there.
So what this lets us do is
we're iterating over all
of the keys in this data state interface,
right?
So that's gonna be first digits,
then names then flags, and
then we're using this as keyword,
as is how this remapping can happen.
And we're adding the word set in
front of it and capitalizing, so
we get a little method here
that's called setDigits,
setFlags and we can pass these things in.
So if you've written data
layer code where you have
a bunch of Boolean
properties where it's is,
is dark mode, is user opt into beta.
Well, you could see how you
can now in a very generalized
way derive some controlled accessors for
those kinds of things.
Maybe you would use object.defined
property to dynamically build
something and then be able to
represent the types accurately.
Let me show you a library where
I would hope one day they'd use
something like this to define types.
This is my favorite library for
colorizing CLI stuff in JavaScript.
And basically, to make this string
blue with a red background,
you do .blue, and
then look at this, bgRed.
So every colors available as
a foreground or background.
And now instead of explicitly
saying we've got the red and
then we've got here's the red and
then here's the bgRed.
But now you could define this template
type that would just add bg capitalized,
the R in red boom, and
now you can make a really nice API.
And this library is a pleasure to use,
it's very easily proves
that you can build beautiful and
highly ergonomic APIs.
Not rest APIs but functional APIs
using this kind of technique.
And look, we're now back to
catching spelling errors again,
we get true type checking here,
because I left the E off of mobile and
TypeScripts figured that out.